# push swap

## Overview

The "push_swap" project at 42 is a programming challenge that involves sorting a stack of integers using a limited set of instructions. The goal is to develop an efficient algorithm that can transform an unsorted stack into a sorted one, using only a predefined set of operations like pushing and swapping elements between two stacks. It's a test of both algorithmic problem-solving and coding skills.

## The rules

- You have 2 stacks named `a` and `b`.
- At the beginning:
   - The stack `a` contains a random amount of negative and/or positive numbers
which cannot be duplicated.
   - The stack `b` is empty.
- The goal is to sort in ascending order numbers into stack `a`. To do so you have the
following operations at your disposal:
   - `sa` (swap a): Swap the first 2 elements at the top of stack `a`. Do nothing if there is only one or no elements.
   - `sb` (swap b): Swap the first 2 elements at the top of stack `b`. Do nothing if there is only one or no elements.
   - `ss` : `sa` and `sb` at the same time.
   - `pa` (push a): Take the first element at the top of `b` and put it at the top of `a`. Do nothing if b is empty.
   - `pb` (push b): Take the first element at the top of `a` and put it at the top of `b`. Do nothing if a is empty.
   - `ra` (rotate a): Shift up all elements of stack a by 1. The first element becomes the last one.
   - `rb` (rotate b): Shift up all elements of stack b by 1. The first element becomes the last one.
   - `rr` : `ra` and `rb` at the same time.
   - `rra` (reverse rotate a): Shift down all elements of stack a by 1. The last element becomes the first one.
   - `rrb` (reverse rotate b): Shift down all elements of stack b by 1. The last element becomes the first one.
   - `rrr` : `rra` and `rrb` at the same time

## Features

- Sorts a stack of integers using push and swap operations.
- Implements an optimized sorting algorithm.
- Provides detailed instructions on running the program and testing.
- Offers a clear and well-structured codebase for easy understanding and modification.

## My algorithm

The algorithm is a variation of a divide-and-conquer sorting method designed specifically for two stacks. The approach combines concepts from selection sort, insertion sort, and merge sort.

**Algorithm approach**: The algorithm takes a divide-and-conquer approach for stacks larger than three. It divides stack_a into smaller chunks and pushes these chunks to stack_b. It then sorts the remaining elements in stack_a and gradually pushes back elements from stack_b to stack_a in a sorted manner.

**Stack structure**: The stack structure (t_stack) is assumed to have at least two members: value, which is the integer value of the element, and index, which is the initial position or index of the element in the unsorted stack_a. The stack is implemented as a singly linked list, given the presence of the next pointer


## Getting Started

Follow these steps to get started with the Push Swap project:

1. Clone the repository:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/zelhajou/push_swap.git
```
2. Compile the project:

```bash
make
```

3. Run the program with your input:

```bash
./push_swap 3 2 1
```

4. Test the program:
```bash
./push_swap 3 2 1 | ./checker 3 2 1
````

##  Usage
Replace `3` `2` `1` with your own input numbers for testing.
View the detailed usage instructions and available options in the project documentation.

## Folder structure
 * [lib](./lib) `external libraries`
   * [ft_printf](./lib/ft_printf)
   * [libft](./lib/libft)
 * [include](./include) `Header files`
   * [push_swap.h](./include/push_swap.h)
 * [bin](./bin) `Object files (generated by Makefile)`
 * [src](./src) `Source code files` 
   * [stack_operations.c](./src/stack_operations.c) `Stack manipulation functions`
   * [sorting.c](./src/sorting_algorithm.c) `Sorting algorithm implementation`
   * [validation.c](./src/validation.c) `Input validation functions`
   * [push_swap.c](./src/push_swap.c) `Main program file`
   * [utils.c](./src/utils.c) `Utility functions`
 * [Makefile](./Makefile) `Makefile for building the project`


